# ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E),   Second edition, 2014-12-15
# Software engineering — Guidelines for the application of ISO 9001:2008 to computer software

## Introduction

This International Standard provides guidance for organizations in the application of ISO 9001:2008 to
the acquisition, supply, development, operation, and maintenance of computer software.

It identifies the issues that should be addressed and is independent of the technology, life cycle models,
development processes, sequence of activities, and organizational structure used by an organization. The
guidance and identified issues are intended to be comprehensive but not exhaustive. Where the scope of
an organization’s activities includes areas other than computer software development, the relationship
between the computer software elements of that organization’s quality management system and the
remaining aspects should be clearly documented within the quality management system as a whole.

Clauses 4, 5, and 6 and parts of Clause 8 of ISO 9001:2008 are applied mainly at the “global” level in the
organization, although they do have some effect at the “project/product level”. Each project or product
development may tailor the associated parts of the organization’s quality management system to suit
project/product-specific requirements.

Throughout ISO 9001:2008, “shall” is used to express a provision that is binding between two or more
parties, “should” to express a recommendation among possibilities, and “may” to indicate a course of
action permissible within the limits of ISO 9001:2008. This International Standard (ISO/IEC 90003)
provides guidance to assist in understanding how the provisions of ISO 9001:2008 apply in the context
of software.

Organizations with quality management systems for developing, operating, or maintaining software
based on this International Standard may choose to use processes from ISO/IEC 12207 to support
or complement the ISO 9001:2008 process model. The related paragraphs of ISO/IEC 12207:2008
are referenced in each clause of this International Standard; however, they are not intended to imply
requirements additional to those in ISO 9001:2008. Further guidance to the use of ISO/IEC 12207 may
be found in ISO/IEC 24748–3. For additional guidance, references are provided to the International
Standards for software engineering defined by ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 7. Where these references are specific
to a clause or subclause of ISO 9001:2008, they appear after the guidance for that clause or subclause.
Where they apply generally across the parts of a clause or subclause, the references are included at the
end of the last part of the clause or subclause.

Where text has been quoted from ISO 9001:2008, that text is enclosed in a box, for ease of identification.


---﻿

﻿
Software engineering — Guidelines for the application of
ISO 9001:2008 to computer software
1 Scope
1.1 General
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
1.1 General
This International Standard specifies requirements for a quality management system where an
organization
a) needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide product that meets customer and
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements, and
b) aims to enhance customer satisfaction through the effective application of the system, including
processes for continual improvement of the system and the assurance of conformity to customer and
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements.
NOTE 1 In this International Standard, the term “product” only applies to
a) product intended for, or required by, a customer,
b) any intended output resulting from the product realization processes.
NOTE 2 Statutory and regulatory requirements can be expressed as legal requirements.
This International Standard provides guidance for organizations in the application of ISO 9001:2008
to the acquisition, supply, development, operation, and maintenance of computer software and related
support services. It does not add to or otherwise change the requirements of ISO 9001:2008.
Annex A (informative) provides a table pointing to additional guidance in the implementation of
ISO 9001:2008, available in ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 7 and ISO/TC 176 International Standards.
The guidelines provided in this International Standard are not intended to be used as assessment criteria
in quality management system registration/certification.
1.2 Application
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
1.2 Application
All requirements of this International Standard are generic and are intended to be applicable to all
organizations, regardless of type, size, and product provided.
Where any requirement(s) of this International Standard cannot be applied due to the nature of an
organization and its product, this can be considered for exclusion.
Where exclusions are made, claims of conformity to this International Standard are not acceptable
unless these exclusions are limited to requirements within Clause 7, and such exclusions do not affect
the organization’s ability, or responsibility, to provide product that meets customer and applicable
statutory and regulatory requirements.
The application of this International Standard is appropriate to software that is
— part of a commercial contract with another organization,
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 1

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
— a product available for a market sector,
— used to support the processes of an organization,
— embedded in a hardware product, or
— related to software services.
Some organizations may be involved in all of the above activities; others may specialize in one area.
Whatever the situation, the organization’s quality management system should cover all aspects
(software related and non-software related) of the business.
2 Normative references
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
2 Normative references
The following documents, in whole or in part, are normatively referenced in this document and are
indispensable for its application. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated
references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
ISO 9000:2005, Quality management systems — Fundamentals and vocabulary
3 Terms and definitions
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
3 Terms and definitions
For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO 9000 apply.
Throughout the text of this International Standard, wherever the term “product” occurs, it can also
mean “service”.
For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO 9001:2008, and certain terms
(repeated here for convenience) given in ISO/IEC 12207 apply.
However, in the event of a conflict in terms and definitions, the terms and definitions specified in
ISO 9000:2005 apply.
NOTE ISO/IEC 12207:2008 provides detailed provisions for software life cycle processes. This International
Standard will make reference to terms defined in it.
3.1
activity
set of cohesive tasks of a process
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 4.3]
3.2
baseline
specification or product that has been formally reviewed and agreed upon, that thereafter serves as the
basis for further development, and that can be changed only through formal change control procedures
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 4.6]
﻿
2 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
3.3
configuration item
entity within a configuration that satisfies an end use function and that can be uniquely identified at a
given reference point
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 4.7]
3.4
COTS
Commercial-Off-The-Shelf
<software product> available for purchase and use without the need to conduct development activities
3.5
implementation
software life cycle process that contains activities of requirements analysis, design, coding, integration,
testing, installation, and support for acceptance of software products
3.6
life cycle model
framework of processes and activities concerned with the life cycle that may be organized into stages,
which also acts as a common reference for communication and understanding
Note 1 to entry: The requirements of ISO 9001:2008 would apply to maintenance, only if contractually required,
after acceptance of the product by the customer. However, generally, the requirements do not apply to maintenance.
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 4.17]
3.7
measure
make a measurement
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15939:2007, 2.16]
3.8
measure
variable to which a value is assigned as the result of measurement
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15939:2007, 2.15]
3.9
measurement
set of operations having the object of determining a value of a measure
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 15939:2007, 2.17]
3.10
process
set of interrelated or interacting activities which transforms inputs into outputs
Note 1 to entry: Inputs to a process are generally outputs of other processes.
[SOURCE: ISO 9000:2005, 3.4.1]
3.11
regression testing
testing required to determine that a change to a system component has not adversely affected
functionality, reliability, or performance, and has not introduced additional defects
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 3

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
3.12
release
particular version of a configuration item that is made available for a specific purpose
Note 1 to entry: The term “release” used in the ISO 9001:2008 text quoted in this International Standard is used
in the context of the definition provided in ISO 9000:2005, 3.6.13, which is different from the ISO/IEC 12207
definition quoted above.
EXAMPLE Test release
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 4.35]
3.13
replication
copying a software product from one medium to another
3.14
software item
identifiable part of a software product
3.15
software product
set of computer programs, procedures, and possibly associated documentation and data
Note 1 to entry: A software product may be designated for delivery, an integral part of another product, or used
in development.
Note 2 to entry: This is different from a product in ISO 9000.
Note 3 to entry: For the purposes of this International Standard, “software” is synonymous with “software
product”.
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 12207:2008, definition 4.42]
﻿
4 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
4 Quality management system
4.1 General requirements
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
4.1 General requirements
The organization shall establish, document, implement and maintain a quality management system
and continually improve its effectiveness in accordance with the requirements of this International
Standard.
The organization shall
a) determine the processes needed for the quality management system and their application
throughout the organization (see 1.2),
b) determine the sequence and interaction of these processes,
c) determine criteria and methods needed to ensure that both the operation and control of these
processes are effective,
d) ensure the availability of resources and information necessary to support the operation and
monitoring of these processes,
e) monitor, measure where applicable, and analyse these processes, and
f) implement actions necessary to achieve planned results and continual improvement of these
processes.
These processes shall be managed by the organization in accordance with the requirements of this
International Standard.
Where an organization chooses to outsource any process that affects product conformity to
requirements, the organization shall ensure control over such processes. The type and extent of
control to be applied to these outsourced processes shall be defined within the quality management
system.
NOTE 1 Processes needed for the quality management system referred to above include processes
for management activities, provision of resources, product realization, measurement, analysis and
improvement.
NOTE 2 An “outsourced process” is a process that the organization needs for its quality management
system and which the organization chooses to have performed by an external party.
NOTE 3 Ensuring control over outsourced processes does not absolve the organization of the
responsibility of conformity to all customer, statutory and regulatory requirements. The type and
extent of control to be applied to the outsourced process can be influenced by factors such as
a) the potential impact of the outsourced process on the organization’s capability to provide
product that conforms to requirements,
b) the degree to which the control for the process is shared,
c) the capability of achieving the necessary control through the application of 7.4.
Guidance is provided for items a) and b) of ISO 9001:2008, 4.1, in relation to the organizational processes
as follows (see 5.4.2, and 7.4.1 for additional guidance on outsourcing).
a) Process identification and application
The organization should also identify the processes for software development, operation or maintenance.
b) Process sequence and interaction
The organization should also define the sequence and interaction of the processes in:
1) life cycle models for software development, e.g. waterfall, incremental and evolutionary, and
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 5

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
2) quality and development planning, which should be based upon a life cycle model.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008[5] (Software Life Cycle Processes) which defines a set of software life cycle
processes that may be used for reference;
— ISO/IEC/TR 24748–1[21] and ISO/IEC/TR 24748–3[22] which provide guidance on how to use processes
from ISO/IEC 12207 in different life cycles.
4.2 Documentation requirements
4.2.1 General
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
4.2.1 General
The quality management system documentation shall include
a) documented statements of a quality policy and quality objectives,
b) a quality manual,
c) documented procedures and records required by this International Standard, and
d) documents, including records, determined by the organization to be necessary to ensure the
effective planning, operation and control of its processes.
NOTE 1 Where the term “documented procedure” appears within this International Standard, this
means that the procedure is established, documented, implemented and maintained. A single
document may address the requirements for one or more procedures. A requirement for a documented
procedure may be covered by more than one document.
NOTE 2 The extent of the quality management system documentation can differ from one organization
to another due to
a) the size of organization and type of activities,
b) the complexity of processes and their interactions, and
c) the competence of personnel.
NOTE 3 The documentation can be in any form or type of medium.
Documents for the effective planning, operation, and control of processes for software [ISO 9001:2008,
4.2.1, item d)] may cover the following:
1) descriptions of processes, such as those identified in implementing 4.1;
2) descriptions of procedural instructions and/or templates used;
3) descriptions of life cycle models used, such as waterfall, incremental and evolutionary;
4) descriptions of tools, techniques, technologies, and methods such as those identified in implementing
4.1;
5) technical topics such as standards or guidance documents for coding, design and development, and
testing.
NOTE For further information on document identification as part of configuration management, see 7.5.3.
﻿
6 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
4.2.2 Quality manual
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
4.2.2 Quality manual
The organization shall establish and maintain a quality manual that includes
a) the scope of the quality management system, including details of and justification for any
exclusions (see 1.2),
b) the documented procedures established for the quality management system, or reference
to them, and
c) a description of the interaction between the processes of the quality management system.
4.2.3 Control of documents
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
4.2.3 Control of documents
Documents required by the quality management system shall be controlled. Records are a special
type of document and shall be controlled according to the requirements given in 4.2.4.
A documented procedure shall be established to define the controls needed
a) to approve documents for adequacy prior to issue,
b) to review and update as necessary and re-approve documents,
c) to ensure that changes and the current revision status of documents are identified,
d) to ensure that relevant versions of applicable documents are available at points of use,
e) to ensure that documents remain legible and readily identifiable,
f) to ensure that documents of external origin determined by the organization to be necessary for
the planning and operation of the quality management system are identified and their distribution
controlled, and
g) to prevent the unintended use of obsolete documents, and to apply suitable identification to them
if they are retained for any purpose.
NOTE For further information on document control as part of configuration management, see 7.5.3.
4.2.4 Control of records
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
4.2.4 Control of records
Records established to provide evidence of conformity to requirements and of the effective operation
of the quality management system shall be controlled.
The organization shall establish a documented procedure to define the controls needed for the
identification, storage, protection, retrieval, retention and disposition of records.
Records shall remain legible, readily identifiable and retrievable.
4.2.4.1 Evidence of conformity to requirements
Evidence of conformity to requirements may include:
a) documented test results,
b) problem reports, including those related to tools problems,
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 7

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
c) change requests,
d) documents marked with comments,
e) audit and assessment reports, and
f) review and inspection records, such as those for design reviews, code inspections, and walkthroughs.
4.2.4.2 Evidence of effective operation
Examples of evidence of effective operation of the quality management system may include, but are not
limited to
a) changes (and the reasoning) to resources (people, software and equipment),
b) estimates, e.g. project size and effort (people, cost, schedule),
c) how and why tools, methodologies and suppliers were selected and qualified,
d) software license agreements (both for software supplied to customers and software procured to
aid development),
e) minutes of meetings, and
f) software release records.
4.2.4.3 Retention and disposition
When determining the retention periods for records, consideration should be given to statutory and
regulatory requirements. Where records are held on electronic media, consideration of the retention
times and accessibility of the records should take into account the rate of media degradation, the
availability of the devices, and software needed to access the records. Records may include information
held in email systems. Protection from computer viruses and unapproved or illegal access should be
considered.
The proprietary nature of the information stored on records should be assessed, in determining the
methods of data erasure from the media, at the end of its required retention period.
NOTE For further guidance related to ISO 9001:2008, 4.2, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.3.6 (Information
Management Process) and 7.2.1 (Software Documentation Management Process).
5 Management responsibility
5.1 Management commitment
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.1 Management commitment
Top management shall provide evidence of its commitment to the development and implementation of
the quality management system and continually improving its effectiveness by
a) communicating to the organization the importance of meeting customer as well as statutory and
regulatory requirements,
b) establishing the quality policy,
c) ensuring that quality objectives are established,
d) conducting management reviews, and
e) ensuring the availability of resources.
﻿
8 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
5.2 Customer focus
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.2 Customer focus
Top management shall ensure that customer requirements are determined and are met with the aim
of enhancing customer satisfaction (see 7.2.1 and 8.2.1).
5.3 Quality policy
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.3 Quality Policy
Top management shall ensure that the quality policy
a) is appropriate to the purpose of the organization,
b) includes a commitment to comply with requirements and continually improve the effectiveness of
the quality management system,
c) provides a framework for establishing and reviewing quality objectives,
d) is communicated and understood within the organization, and
e) is reviewed for continuing suitability.
5.4 Planning
5.4.1 Quality objectives
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.4.1 Quality objectives
Top management shall ensure that quality objectives, including those needed to meet requirements
for product [see 7.1 a)], are established at relevant functions and levels within the organization. The
quality objectives shall be measurable and consistent with the quality policy.
NOTE 1 Information on attributes of software processes suitable for setting objectives may be found in
ISO/IEC 15504–1.[10] ISO/IEC 15504 (all parts) may be used for assessing process capabilities and for setting
objectives for improving process capabilities.
NOTE 2 Information on quality characteristics, subcharacteristics and attributes of a software product
suitable for setting quality objectives are defined in ISO/IEC 25010.[24] The ISO/IEC 25000 series of standards are
useful for defining quality requirements and for setting quality objectives of a software product.
5.4.2 Quality management system planning
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.4.2 Quality management system planning
Top management shall ensure that
a) the planning of the quality management system is carried out in order to meet the requirements
given in 4.1, as well as the quality objectives, and
b) the integrity of the quality management system is maintained when changes to the quality
management system are planned and implemented.
Planning may occur at organizational and project/product levels.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 9

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Quality management system planning at the organizational level may include the following:
a) defining appropriate software life cycle models to be used for the types of project that the
organization undertakes, including how the organization normally implements software life cycle
processes;
b) defining the work products of software development, such as software requirements documents,
architectural design documents, detailed design documents, program code, and software user
documentation;
c) defining the content of software management plans, such as software project management plans,
software configuration management plans, software verification and validation plans, software
quality assurance plans and training plans;
d) defining how software engineering methods are tailored for the organization’s projects within the
life cycle (see 1.2);
e) identifying the tools and environment for software development, operations or maintenance;
f) specifying conventions for the use of programming languages, e.g. coding rules, software libraries
and frameworks;
g) identifying any software reuse (see also 7.5.4).
The organization’s management representative should consider any change to a software life cycle
model which may affect the quality management system and should ensure that such changes do not
compromise any quality management system controls.
Software quality planning at the project/product level is discussed in 7.1.
5.5 Responsibility, authority and communication
5.5.1 Responsibility and authority
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.5.1 Responsibility and authority
Top management shall ensure that responsibilities and authorities are defined and communicated
within the organization.
5.5.2 Management representative
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.5.2 Management representative
Top management shall appoint a member of the organization’s management who, irrespective of other
responsibilities, shall have responsibility and authority that includes
a) ensuring that processes needed for the quality management system are established, implemented
and maintained,
b) reporting to top management on the performance of the quality management system and any
need for improvement, and
c) ensuring the promotion of awareness of customer requirements throughout the organization.
NOTE The responsibility of a management representative can include liaison with external parties
on matters relating to the quality management system.
For a software-producing organization, there is benefit if the management representative has had
experience with software development.
﻿
10 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
5.5.3 Internal communication
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.5.3 Internal communication
Top management shall ensure that appropriate communication processes are established within the
organization and that communication takes place regarding the effectiveness of the quality
management system.
5.6 Management review
5.6.1 General
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.6.1 General
Top management shall review the organization’s quality management system, at planned intervals,
to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. This review shall include assessing
opportunities for improvement and the need for changes to the quality management system,
including the quality policy and quality objectives.
Records from management reviews shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
5.6.2 Review input
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.6.2 Review input
The input to management review shall include information on
a) results of audits,
b) customer feedback,
c) process performance and product conformity,
d) status of preventive and corrective actions,
e) follow-up actions from previous management reviews,
f) changes that could affect the quality management system, and
g) recommendations for improvement.
Guidance is provided for ISO 9001:2008, 5.6.2, item c) as follows.
One way to measure process performance is to perform software process assessments (see 8.2.3). The
outcomes of software process assessments should be considered as input to management reviews.
One way to measure product conformity is to perform software product evaluation (see 8.2.4). The
outcomes of software product evaluation should be considered as input to management review.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 11

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
5.6.3 Review output
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
5.6.3 Review output
The output from the management review shall include any decisions and actions related to
a) improvement of the effectiveness of the quality management system and its processes,
b) improvement of product related to customer requirements, and
c) resource needs.
6 Resource management
6.1 Provision of resources
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
6.1 Provision of resources
The organization shall determine and provide the resources needed
a) to implement and maintain the quality management system and continually improve its
effectiveness, and
b) to enhance customer satisfaction by meeting customer requirements.
6.2 Human resources
6.2.1 General
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
6.2.1 General
Personnel performing work affecting conformity to product requirements shall be competent on the
basis of appropriate education, training, skills and experience.
NOTE Conformity to product requirements can be affected directly or indirectly by personnel
performing any task within the quality management system.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.2.4, Human Resource Management Process.
6.2.2 Competence, awareness and training
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
6.2.2 Competence, training, and awareness
The organization shall
a) determine the necessary competence for personnel performing work affecting conformity to
product requirements,
b) where applicable, provide training or take other actions to achieve the necessary competence,
c) evaluate the effectiveness of the actions taken,
d) ensure that its personnel are aware of the relevance and importance of their activities and how
they contribute to the achievement of the quality objectives, and
e) maintain appropriate records of education, training, skills and experience (see 4.2.4).
﻿
12 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
The training needs should be determined considering the requirements notation, design methods, specific
programming languages, tools, techniques and computer resources to be used in the development and
management of the software product/project. It might also be useful to include training in the skills and
knowledge of the specific field within which the software is applied and in other topics such as project
management.
The technologies employed in software development, operation and maintenance should be continually
monitored and evaluated in order to determine requirements for updating staff skills.
The form of training may not be necessarily traditional training courses but could be workshops,
computer-based training, self-study, mentoring, training on-the-job or web-based training.
Evaluation of the effectiveness of training may be performed using measurements of products
and processes, identifying areas of improvement in personal performance (among other areas for
improvement).
6.3 Infrastructure
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
6.3 Infrastructure
The organization shall determine, provide and maintain the infrastructure needed to achieve
conformity to product requirements. Infrastructure includes, as applicable,
a) buildings, workspace and associated utilities,
b) process equipment (both hardware and software), and
c) supporting services (such as transport, communication or information systems).
The infrastructure should include hardware, software, tools and facilities for development, operation or
maintenance of software.
The infrastructure may include software tools that support the design and development process
including the following:
a) tools, such as for analysis, design and development, configuration management, testing, project
management, documentation, code creation or generation;
b) application development and support environments;
c) knowledge management, intranet, extranet tools;
d) network tools, including security, backup, virus protection, firewall;
e) help desk and maintenance tools;
f) access controls;
g) software libraries;
h) operations control tools such as for network monitoring, systems management and storage
management.
Whether these tools and techniques are developed internally or are purchased, the organization should
evaluate whether or not they are fit for purpose. Tools used in the implementation of the product, such
as analysis and design and development tools, compilers and assemblers should be evaluated, approved
and placed under an appropriate level of configuration management control prior to use. The scope of
use of such tools and techniques may be documented with appropriate guidance, and their use reviewed,
as appropriate, to determine whether there is a need to improve and/or upgrade them.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 13

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.2.2, Infrastructure Management Process;
— ISO/IEC 25001[23] (Acquisition) and ISO/IEC 25040[25] a nd 2 5041[26] (Evaluation of a Software
Product);
— ISO/IEC 14102.[6]
6.4 Work environment
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
6.4 Work environment
The organization shall determine and manage the work environment needed to achieve conformity to
product requirements.
NOTE The term “work environment” relates to those conditions under which work is performed
including physical, environmental and other factors (such as noise, temperature, humidity, lighting or
weather).
7 Product realization
7.1 Planning of product realization
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.1 Planning of product realization
The organization shall plan and develop the processes needed for product realization. Planning of
product realization shall be consistent with the requirements of the other processes of the quality
management system (see 4.1).
In planning product realization, the organization shall determine the following, as appropriate:
a) quality objectives and requirements for the product;
b) the need to establish processes and documents, and to provide resources specific to the product;
c) required verification, validation, monitoring, measurement, inspection and test activities specific
to
the product and the criteria for product acceptance;
d) records needed to provide evidence that the realization processes and resulting product meet
requirements (see 4.2.4).
The output of this planning shall be in a form suitable for the organization’s method of operations.
NOTE 1 A document specifying the processes of the quality management system (including the
product realization processes) and the resources to be applied to a specific product, project or contract
can be referred to as a quality plan.
NOTE 2 The organization may also apply the requirements given in 7.3 to the development of product
realization processes.
7.1.1 Software life cycle
Processes, activities and tasks should be planned and performed using life cycle models suitable to
the nature of a software project, considering size, complexity, safety, risk and integrity. ISO 9001:2008
is intended for application irrespective of the life cycle models used and is not intended to indicate a
specific life cycle model or process sequence.
Design and development can be an evolutionary process and procedures may therefore need to be
changed or updated as the project progresses, after consideration of changes to related activities and
tasks.
﻿
14 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Consideration should be given to the suitability of the design and development method for the type of
task, product or project and the compatibility of the application, the methods and the tools to be used.
For products where failure may cause injury or danger to people, or damage or corruption of property or
the environment, design and development of such software should ensure definition of specific design
and development requirements that specify desired immunity from, and response to, potential failure
conditions.
Software development planning should result in a definition of what products are to be produced,
who is to produce them, and when they are to be produced (see 7.3.1). Software quality planning at
the project/product level should result in a description of how specific products are to be developed,
assessed or maintained.
7.1.2 Quality planning
Quality planning provides the means for tailoring the application of the quality management system
to a specific project, product or contract. Quality planning may include or reference generic and/or
project/product/contract-specific procedures, as appropriate. Quality planning should be revisited
along with the progress of design and development, and items concerned with each stage should be
completely defined when starting that stage. Quality planning may be reviewed and agreed by all
organizations concerned in its implementation, as appropriate.
NOTE 1 A document that describes quality planning may be an independent document (entitled quality plan),
a part of another document, or composed of several documents, including a design and development plan.
NOTE 2 ISO/IEC 12207 [5] includes quality planning and development planning as a single planning activity
leading to the creation of project management plan(s). A mapping table is provided in Annex B, to show how
the items in 7.1.1 and 7.3.1 are satisfied by the related items in ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 6.1.2.3.4.5, 7.1.1.3.1.4, and
7.2.3.3.1.3.
Software quality planning at the project level should address the following:
a) inclusion of, or reference to, the plans for development (see 7.3.1);
b) quality requirements related to the product and/or processes;
c) quality management system tailoring and/or identification of specific procedures and instructions,
appropriate to the scope of the quality manual and any stated exclusions (ISO 9001:2008 , 1.2);
d) project-specific procedures and instructions, such as software test specifications detailing plans,
designs, test cases and procedures for unit, integration, system and acceptance testing (see 8.2.4);
e) methods, life cycle model(s), tools, programming language conventions, libraries, frameworks and
other reusable assets to be used in the project;
f) criteria for starting and ending each project stage;
g) types of review, and other verification and validation activities to be carried out (see 7.3.4, 7.3.5 and
7.3.6);
h) configuration management procedures to be carried out (see 7.5.3);
i) monitoring and measurement activities to be carried out;
j) the person(s) responsible for approving the outputs of processes for subsequent use;
k) training needs in the use of tools and techniques, and scheduling of the training before the skill is
needed;
l) records to be maintained (see 4.2.4);
m) change management, such as for resources, timescale and contract changes.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 15

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Quality planning, however abbreviated, is particularly useful to clarify limited quality objectives for
software being designed for a limited purpose. Examples of limited-purpose software include proofof-
concept demonstration prototypes, a research computation used only by its designer, an interim
solution lacking features such as security or full operational performance that will be implemented in a
future output, and one-time data analysis reports.
Limited-purpose software should be tested in ways that are consistent with its planned use to reduce
the possible occurrence of unintended omissions and errors.
NOTE 3 For further general guidance related to ISO 9001:2008, 7.1, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.3.1, (Project Planning Process), and 7.2 (Software Support Processes)
— ISO/IEC 25010:2011;[24]
— ISO/IEC 25001:2007;[23]
— ISO/IEC 16326:2009.[17]
7.2 Customer-related processes
7.2.1 Determination of requirements related to the product
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.2.1 Determination of requirements related to the product
The organization shall determine
a) requirements specified by the customer, including the requirements for delivery and post-delivery
activities,
b) requirements not stated by the customer but necessary for specified or intended use, where
known,
c) statutory and regulatory requirements applicable to the product, and
d) any additional requirements considered necessary by the organization.
NOTE Post-delivery activities include, for example, actions under warranty provisions, contractual
obligations such as maintenance services, and supplementary services such as recycling or final disposal.
7.2.1.1 Customer-related requirements [ISO 9001:2008, 7.2.1, items a) and b)]
Software may be developed as part of a contract, as a product available for a market sector, as software
embedded in a system, or in support of the business processes of the organization. Requirements
determination is applicable in all these circumstances.
Specific actions may include:
a) the establishment of the following for developing the requirements:
1) methods for agreement of requirements and authorizing and tracking changes, especially
during iterative development;
2) methods for the evaluation of prototypes or demonstrations, where used;
3) methods for recording and reviewing discussion results from all parties involved;
b) the development of the requirements in close cooperation with the customer or users, and efforts to
prevent misunderstandings by, for example, the provision of definition of terms, explanation of the
background of requirements;
﻿
16 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
c) the obtainment of the customer’s approval of the requirements;
d) the establishment of a method for traceability of the requirements to the final product (such as a
requirements traceability matrix).
The requirements may be provided by the customer, may be developed by the organization or may be
jointly developed.
When the requirements are provided and agreed in the form of a system specification, methods
should be in place to allocate them into hardware and software items with any appropriate interface
specifications. Changes to the requirements should be controlled. The contract may need to be amended
when requirements change.
In contractual situations, the requirements may not be fully defined at contract acceptance, and some
may be developed during a project.
The requirements may need to take the operational environment into account. The requirements may
include, but not be limited to, the following characteristics: functionality, reliability, usability, efficiency,
maintainability and portability. Other characteristics may be specified, for example security, safety and
statutory obligations. Some of these characteristics may be mission and/or safety critical.
If the software product needs to interface with other software or system products, the interfaces between
the software product to be developed and other software or system products should be specified, as far
as possible, either directly or by reference, in the requirements.
The requirements should be expressed in clear and unambiguous terms that facilitate validation during
product acceptance. Requirements should be traceable throughout the development life cycle (see 7.5.3)
7.2.1.2 Additional requirements determined by the organization [ISO 9001:2008, 7.2.1, item d)]
NOTE 1 For further information on 7.2.1.1, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.4.2 (System Requirements Analysis Process), 6.4.3 (System Architectural
Design Process), 7.1.2 (Software Requirements Analysis);
— ISO/IEC 29148:2011;[29]
— ISO/IEC 25010:2011;[24]
— ISO/IEC 15026–3:2011.[3]
NOTE 2 For further information on 7.2.1.2, see ISO/IEC 25051:2006.[27]
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 17

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.2.2 Review of requirements related to the product
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.2.2 Review of requirements related to the product
The organization shall review the requirements related to the product. This review shall be conducted prior to
the organization’s commitment to supply a product to the customer (e.g. submission of tenders, acceptance of
contracts or orders, acceptance of changes to contracts or orders) and shall ensure that
a) product requirements are defined,
b) contract or order requirements differing from those previously expressed are resolved, and
c) the organization has the ability to meet the defined requirements.
Records of the results of the review and actions arising from the review shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
Where the customer provides no documented statement of requirement, the customer requirements shall be
confirmed by the organization before acceptance.
Where product requirements are changed, the organization shall ensure that relevant documents are amended
and that relevant personnel are made aware of the changed requirements.
NOTE In some situations, such as internet sales, a formal review is impractical for each order. Instead the
review can cover relevant product information such as catalogues or advertising material.
7.2.2.1 Organization’s concerns
Issues which may be relevant during the organization’s review of software tenders, contracts or orders
include, but are not limited to the following:
a) the feasibility of meeting and validating the requirements and product characteristics, including
identifying the required software characteristics (e.g. functionality, reliability, usability,
maintainability, portability and efficiency);
b) software design and development standards and procedures to be used;
c) the identification of facilities, tools, software items and data, to be provided by the customer, the
definition and documentation of methods to assess their suitability for use;
d) the operating system or hardware platform;
e) agreement on the control of external interfaces with the software product;
f) replication and distribution requirements;
g) customer-related issues:
1) life cycle processes imposed by the customer;
2) period of obligation of the organization to supply copies and the capability of reading master
copies;
h) management issues:
1) risk management should be addressed (see also 7.2.2.2);
2) organization’s responsibility with regard to subcontracted work;
3) scheduling of progress, technical reviews and outputs;
4) installation, maintenance and support requirements;
﻿
18 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
5) timely availability of technical, human and financial resources;
i) legal, security and confidentiality issues:
1) information handled under the contract may be subject to concerns regarding intellectual
property rights, licence agreements, statutory and regulatory requirements, confidentiality
and the protection of information including patents and copyrights;
2) guardianship of the master copy of the product and the rights of the customer to access or
verify that master;
3) level of information disclosure, to the customer, needs to be mutually agreed to by the parties;
4) definition of warranty terms;
5) liabilities/penalties associated with the contract.
7.2.2.2 Risks
The following risks may be included when reviewing requirements related to the product:
a) criticality, safety and security issues;
b) capabilities and experience of the organization or its suppliers;
c) reliability of estimates of resources and the duration required for each activity;
d) significant differences between the times required to deliver products or services, and the times
determined from plans through the optimization of cost and quality goals;
e) significant geographical dispersion of the organization, customers, users and suppliers;
f) high technical novelty, including novel methods, tools, technologies and supplied software;
g) low quality or availability of supplied software and tools;
h) low precision, accuracy and stability of the definition of the customer requirements and external
interfaces.
The implications of any contract changes on resources, schedules and costs should be evaluated,
particularly for changes to scope, functionality or risk. The above issues should be re-evaluated, as
appropriate.
7.2.2.3 Customer representative
The customer may have responsibilities under the contract. Particular issues may include the need for
the customer to cooperate with the organization, to provide necessary information in a timely manner,
and to resolve action items. When assigned to monitor life cycle activities, a customer representative may
represent the eventual users of the product, as well as executive management, and have the authority to
deal with contractual matters which include, but are not limited to, the following:
a) dealing with customer-supplied software items, data, facilities and tools that are found unsuitable
for use;
b) organizing access to end-users, where appropriate.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 19

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Review of requirements may be performed by internal or external organizations. This may include
reviews of requirements related to contracts, engineering, maintenance or quality.
NOTE For further information on requirements review, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.1.2 (Supply Process),
6.1.2.3.4.14 (Verification), and 7.2.6 (Review Process). For further information on requirements engineering
for eliciting, analysing, verifying and validating customer requirements, see ISO/IEC 29148.[29] For further
information on risk management, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.3.4 (Risk Management) and ISO/IEC 16085:2006.
[16] For further information on review of quality requirements using quality characteristics, see ISO/IEC 25010.
[24]
7.2.3 Customer communication
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.2.3 Customer communication
The organization shall determine and implement effective arrangements for communicating with
customers in relation to
a) product information,
b) enquiries, contracts or order handling, including amendments, and
c) customer feedback, including customer complaints.
7.2.3.1 General
For computer software, the method of communication may vary depending on the type of contractual
agreement, and on the scope of the contract for development, operations or maintenance.
The following guidance for communicating with customers is separated into advice for development
and advice for operations/maintenance life cycle processes.
7.2.3.2 Customer communication during development
Joint reviews involving the organization and the customer may be scheduled on a regular basis, or at
significant project events, to cover the following aspects, as appropriate:
a) product information, including
1) development plans,
2) conformance of outputs, such as design and development documents, to the customer’s agreed
requirements,
3) demonstrations of outputs of the development processes, such as prototypes, and
4) acceptance test results;
b) enquiries, contracts and amendments, including
1) the progress of activities concerning the eventual users of the system under development, such
as deployment and training,
2) the progress of software development work undertaken by the organization,
3) the progress of agreed activities being undertaken by the customer,
4) the processing of risk management issues, problems and change control items, and
5) the methods by which the customer will be advised of current or planned future changes.
﻿
20 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.2.3.3 Customer communication during operations and maintenance
Sources of information that involve customer communication in operations and maintenance may
include the following:
a) product information, including
1) online help, user manuals describing the product and its use,
2) descriptions of new releases and upgrades, and
3) product web sites;
b) enquiries, contracts and amendments, including
1) progress on product or service delivery, and/or maintenance activities, and
2) processing service or product risks, issues and change requests;
c) customer feedback, including
1) help desk arrangements and effectiveness,
2) progress on customer complaints processing, and
3) surveys, user groups, conferences.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 7.2.6 (Software Review Process), 6.1.2 (Supply Process), 6.4.9.3.4 (customer
support) and F.3 (Contract Change Management Process).
— ISO/IEC 14764:2006[8] (Software Maintenance).
7.3 Design and development
7.3.1 Design and development planning
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.1 Design and development planning
The organization shall plan and control the design and development of product.
During the design and development planning, the organization shall determine
a) the design and development stages,
b) the review, verification and validation that are appropriate to each design and development stage,
and
c) the responsibilities and authorities for design and development.
The organization shall manage the interfaces between different groups involved in design and development
to ensure effective communication and clear assignment of responsibility.
Planning output shall be updated, as appropriate as the design and development progresses.
NOTE Design and development review, verification and validation have distinct purposes.
They can be conducted and recorded separately or in any combination, as suitable for the product
and the organization.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 21

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.3.1.1 Design and development planning
Design and development should be carried out in a disciplined manner to prevent or minimize the
occurrence of problems. This approach reduces dependence on verification and validation as the
sole methods for identifying problems. The organization should therefore ensure that the software
products are developed in compliance with specified requirements and in accordance with design and
development planning and/or quality planning (see 7.1 for quality planning).
NOTE 1 ISO/IEC 12207[5] includes quality planning and development planning as a single planning activity
leading to the creation of project management plan(s). A mapping table is provided in Annex B, to show how
the items in 7.1.1 and 7.3.1 are satisfied by the related items in ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 6.1.2.3.4.5, 7.1.1.3.1.4 and
7.2.3.3.1.3.
NOTE 2 Some items in the following list have been included in the quality planning list in 7.1.2. These are noted
in square brackets.
Design and development planning should address the following items, as appropriate:
a) the activities of requirements analysis, design and development, coding, integration, testing,
installation and support for acceptance of software products; this includes the identification of, or
reference to:
1) activities to be carried out;
2) required inputs to each activity;
3) required outputs from each activity;
4) verification required for each activity output [as 7.1.2 g) — see also 7.3.5];
5) management and supporting activities to be carried out;
6) required team training [as 7.1.2 k)];
b) planning for the control of product and service provision;
c) the organization of the project resources, including the team structure, responsibilities, use of
suppliers and material resources to be used;
d) organizational and technical interfaces between different individuals or groups, such as sub-project
teams, suppliers, partners, users, customer representatives, quality assurance representative (see
7.3.1.4);
e) the analysis of the possible risks, assumptions, dependencies and problems associated with the
design and development;
f) the schedule identifying:
1) the stages of the project [see also 7.1.2 j)];
2) the work breakdown structure;
3) the associated resources and timing;
4) the associated dependencies;
5) the milestones;
6) verification and validation activities [as 7.1.2 g)];
g) the identification of:
1) standards, rules, practices and conventions, methodology, life cycle model, statutory and
regulatory requirements [as 7.1.2 d) and e)];
﻿
22 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
2) tools and techniques for development, including the qualification of, and configuration controls
placed on, such tools and techniques;
3) facilities, hardware and software for development;
4) configuration management practices [as 7.1.2 h)];
5) method of controlling nonconforming software products;
6) methods of control for software used to support development;
7) procedures for archiving, back-up, recovery, and controlling access to software products;
8) methods of control for virus protection;
9) security controls;
h) the identification of related planning (including planning of the system) addressing topics such as
quality (see 7.1), risk management, configuration management, supplier management, integration,
testing (see 7.3.6), release management, installation, training, migration, maintenance, re-use,
communication and measurement;
i) documentation control including document/record archive and distribution.
For a COTS product in which the organization does not have control over the design, the organization
should assure that the product meets the acceptance criteria.
Planning should be reviewed periodically and any plans amended if appropriate.
NOTE A document defining design and development planning and any of these related planning topics may
be an independent document, a part of another document or composed of several documents.
7.3.1.2 Review, verification and validation
The review, verification and validation for software design and development are covered in 7.3.4 to
7.3.6. In software operations and maintenance, they may be covered in service level agreements or
maintenance procedures.
7.3.1.3 Responsibilities and authorities
There is no specific guidance.
7.3.1.4 Interfaces
The boundaries of responsibility for each part of the software product and the way that technical
information will be transmitted between all parties should be clearly defined in the design and
development planning of suppliers. The organization may require review of a supplier’s design and
development planning.
In defining interfaces, care should be taken to consider parties, other than the customer and organization,
who have an interest in the design and development, installation, operation, maintenance and training
activities. These may include customer representatives, suppliers, partners, quality assurance
representatives, engineering process group representatives, regulatory authorities, associated
development project staff and help desk staff. In particular, the end-users and any intermediate
operations function may need to be involved to ensure that appropriate capacity and training are
available to achieve committed service levels.
NOTE 1 For further information on design and development planning, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.3.1 (Project
Planning Process).
NOTE 2 For further information on software project management, see ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326:2009,[17] 6.1
(Project Planning Process).
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 23

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.3.2 Design and development inputs
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.2 Design and development inputs
Inputs relating to product requirements shall be determined and records maintained (see 4.2.4).
These inputs shall include
a) functional and performance requirements,
b) applicable statutory and regulatory requirements,
c) where applicable, information derived from previous similar designs, and
d) other requirements essential for design and development.
The inputs shall be reviewed for adequacy. Requirements shall be complete, unambiguous and not in
conflict with each other.
In system architectural design, system requirements are allocated to hardware, software components
and manual operations. The inputs to software requirements analysis are the system requirements
allocated to software and specifications of the interfaces between the system components.
For guidance on ISO 9001:2008, 7.3.2 items a), b) and d), see 7.2.1.
Design and development input may be determined from functional, performance, quality, relevant
safety and security requirements and system design constraints, or derived through techniques such
as prototyping. Design and development input may also be determined from design change requests
originating from previous phases in the iterative development model (cycle), problems to be fixed, or
requirements arising from acceptance criteria. Input may also come from contract review activities.
When design and development input documents are being reviewed (this often happens in conjunction
with the customer), they should be checked for
a) ambiguities and contradictions,
b) inconsistent, incomplete or unfeasible information or requirements,
c) unrealistic performance specifications,
d) requirements that cannot be verified or validated,
e) unstated or assumed requirements,
f) inaccurate description of user environment and actions,
g) lack of design and development decisions in a requirements document, and
h) omissions of key performance measures.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 25010:2011[24] for software quality requirements as software
quality characteristics.
﻿
24 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.3.3 Design and development outputs
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.3 Design and development outputs
The outputs of design and development shall be in a form suitable for verification against the design
and development input and shall be approved prior to release.
Design and development outputs shall
a) meet the input requirements for design and development,
b) provide appropriate information for purchasing, production and service provision,
c) contain or reference product acceptance criteria, and
d) specify the characteristics of the product that are essential for its safe and proper use.
NOTE Information for production and service provision can include details for the preservation of
product.
The output from the design and development process should be defined and documented in accordance
with the prescribed or chosen method. This output should be complete, accurate and consistent with
the requirements, and may be produced using computer design and development tools. Design and
development outputs may be expressed in textual form, by diagrams or using symbolic modelling
notation, and may include
a) design, development and test specifications,
b) data models,
c) pseudo code or source code,
d) user guides, operator documentation, training material, maintenance documentation,
e) developed product, and
f) formal methods.
Prototyping, when used, should result in design and development (output) documentation.
The acceptance criteria for design and development outputs should be defined in order to demonstrate
that the inputs to each design and development stage are correctly reflected in the outputs.
Tools should be validated for their specific intended use (see 7.3.6 and 7.6).
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 7.1.3 to 7.1.5 (Software Architectural Design
Process, Software Detailed Design Process, Software Construction Process).
7.3.4 Design and development review
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.4 Design and development review
At suitable stages, systematic reviews of design and development shall be performed in accordance
with planned arrangements (see 7.3.1)
a) to evaluate the ability of the results of design and development to meet requirements, and
b) to identify any problems and propose necessary actions.
Participants in such reviews shall include representatives of functions concerned with the design and
development stage(s) being reviewed. Records of the results of the reviews and any necessary actions
shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 25

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
The degree of formality and rigour of the activities associated with the review processes should be
appropriate for the complexity of the product, the quality requirements and the degree of risk associated
with the specified use of the software product. The organization should establish procedures for dealing
with process and product deficiencies or nonconformities identified during these activities (see 8.3). It
is recommended that these procedures be documented.
During design and development reviews, criteria such as feasibility, security, safety, programming rules
and testability should be taken into account.
NOTE 1 ISO/IEC 12207:2008[5] treats project management and technical reviews as separate activities.
A mapping table is provided in Annex B to show how the related items in the following list are satisfied in
ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 7.2.6.
Review of design and development should be performed in accordance with planned arrangements. The
elements of the review to be considered are the following:
a) what is to be reviewed, when and the type of review, such as demonstrations, formal proof of
correctness, inspections, walkthroughs and joint reviews;
b) what functional groups would be concerned in each type of review and, if there is to be a review
meeting, how it is to be organized and conducted;
c) what records have to be produced, e.g. meeting minutes, issues, problems, actions and action status;
d) the methods for monitoring the application of rules, practices and conventions to ensure
requirements are met;
e) what has to be done prior to the conduct of a review, such as establishment of objectives, meeting
agenda, documents required and roles of review personnel;
f) what has to be done during the review, including the techniques to be used and guidelines for all
participants;
g) the success criteria for the review;
h) what follow-up activities are used to ensure that issues identified at the review are resolved.
Further design and development activities should proceed only when the consequences of all known
deficiencies are understood, or the risk of proceeding otherwise is known and agreed. Any findings
should be addressed and resolved, as appropriate.
NOTE 2 For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 7.1.2.3.1.2, 7.1.3.3.1.6, and 7.1.4.3.1.7 (Requirements
and Design Evaluations) and 7.2.6.3.3 (Technical Reviews).
7.3.5 Design and development verification
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.5 Design and development verification
Verification shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements (see 7.3.1) to ensure that
the design and development outputs have met the design and development input requirements.
Records of the results of the verification and any necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
Verification of software is aimed at providing assurance that the output of a design and development
activity conforms to the input requirements.
Verification should be performed as appropriate during design and development. Verification may
comprise reviews of design and development output (e.g. by inspections and walkthroughs), analysis,
demonstrations including prototypes, simulations or tests. Verification may be conducted on the output
from other activities, e.g. COTS, purchased and customer-supplied products.
﻿
26 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
The verification results and any further actions should be recorded and checked when the actions are
completed.
When the size, complexity or criticality of a software product warrants, specific assurance methods
should be used for verification, such as complexity metrics, peer reviews, condition/decision coverage
or formal methods.
Only verified design and development outputs should be submitted for acceptance and subsequent use.
Any findings should be addressed and resolved, as appropriate.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.4 (Technical Processes) and 7.2.4 (Verification).
7.3.6 Design and development validation
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.6 Design and development validation
Design and development validation shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements
(see 7.3.1) to ensure that the resulting product is capable of meeting the requirements for the
specified application or intended use, where known. Wherever practicable, validation shall be completed
prior to the delivery or implementation of the product. Records of the results of validation and
any necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
7.3.6.1 Validation
Validation of software is aimed at providing reasonable confidence that it will meet its operational
requirements.
Before offering the product for customer acceptance, the organization should validate the operation of
the product in accordance with its specified intended use, under conditions similar to the application
environment, as specified in the contract. Any differences between the validation environment and the
actual application environment, and the risks associated with such differences, should be identified and
justified as early in the life cycle as possible, and recorded. In the course of validation, configuration
audits or evaluations may be performed, where appropriate, before release of a configuration baseline.
Configuration audits or evaluations confirm, by examination of the review, inspection and test records,
that the software product complies with its contractual or specified requirements. This may require
analysis, simulation or emulation where validation is not practicable in operational conditions.
In software development, it is important that the validation results and any further actions required to
meet the specified requirements are recorded, and checked when the actions are completed.
In some cases, it may not be possible, or feasible, to validate fully the software product by measurement
and monitoring. An example may be where safety-related software cannot be tested under actual
circumstances without risking serious consequences, or perhaps the actual circumstances themselves
are rare and difficult to simulate.
The inability to test some software products exhaustively and conclusively may lead the organization
to decide
a) how confidence can be gained from the development and tools used, and
b) what types of testing or analysis can be performed to increase confidence that the product will
perform correctly under the “untestable” circumstances, e.g. static code analysis.
Whatever methods are used, they should be commensurate with the risk and consequences of design
and development failures.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 27

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.3.6.2 Testing
Validation may often be performed by testing. Testing may be required at several levels, from the
individual software item to the complete software product. There are several different approaches to
testing, and the extent of testing and the degree of controls on the test environment, test inputs and test
outputs may vary with the approach, the complexity of the product and the risk associated with the use
of the product. Test planning should address test types, objectives, sequence and scope of testing, test
cases, test data and expected results. Test planning should identify the human and physical resources
needed for testing and define the responsibilities of those involved.
Specific testing for software includes establishing, documenting, reviewing and implementing plans for
the following:
a) unit tests, i.e. stand-alone tests of software components;
b) integration and system tests, i.e. tests of aggregations of software components (and the complete
system);
c) qualification tests, i.e. tests of the complete software product prior to delivery to confirm the
software meets its defined requirements;
d) acceptance tests, i.e. tests of the complete software product to confirm the software meets its
acceptance criteria.
Regression testing should be performed to verify or validate that the capabilities of the software have
not been compromised by a change.
Acceptance tests are those that are performed for the customer’s benefit with the aim of determining the
acceptability of the product. Acceptance may be with or without defects or deviations from requirements,
by agreement of the parties involved.
Testing tools and the environment to be used should be qualified and controlled, and any limitations to
testing recorded.
Testing procedures should cover recording and analysis of results as well as problem and change
management.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.4 (Technical Processes) and 7.2.5 (Validation).
For further information on verification through quality evaluation using quality characteristics and measures,
see ISO/IEC 25010[24] and ISO/IEC 25000 series.
7.3.7 Control of design and development changes
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.3.7 Control of design and development changes
Design and development changes shall be identified and records maintained. The changes shall be
reviewed, verified and validated, as appropriate, and approved before implementation. The review of
design and development changes shall include evaluation of the effect of the changes on constituent
parts and product already delivered. Records of the results of the review of changes and any
necessary actions shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
In the software development environment, control of design and development changes is usually
addressed as part of configuration management (see 7.5.3).
Changes to a software specification or component should maintain appropriate consistency between
requirements, designs, code, tests specifications, user manuals and, where relevant, other additional
items.
NOTE 1 For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008[5]: 6.4.10.3.2 and 6.4.10.3.3 (Modifications); 6.3.6
and 7.2.1 (Documentation); and 6.3.5 and 7.2.2 (Configuration Management).
﻿
28 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
NOTE 2 For further general guidance related to ISO 9001:2008, 7.3, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 25051:2006[27] for guidance on any procured COTS software products;
— ISO/IEC 26514:2008[28] for design and development documentation guidance;
— ISO/IEC 19761:2011,[18] ISO/IEC 20926:2009[21] a nd I SO/IEC 20968:2002[20] for guidance on
estimation of size methods;
— ISO/IEC/TR 14759:1999[7] for guidance on prototype categorization and examples of use;
— ISO/IEC 26514:2008[28] for software user documentation process.
7.4 Purchasing
7.4.1 Purchasing process
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.4.1 Purchasing process
The organization shall ensure that purchased product conforms to specified purchase requirements.
The type and extent of control applied to the supplier and the purchased product shall be dependent
upon the effect of the purchased product on subsequent product realization or the final product.
The organization shall evaluate and select suppliers based on their ability to supply product in
accordance with the organization’s requirements. Criteria for selection, evaluation and re-evaluation
shall be established. Records of the results of evaluations and any necessary actions arising from the
evaluation shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
7.4.1.1 Purchased products
For the purposes of 7.4.1, free software (such as open source development tools) should be considered
as purchased.
In developing, supplying, installing and maintaining software products, types of purchased products
may include:
a) COTS software or shareware;
b) customized software and services;
c) subcontracted development (e.g. contract staff or outsourced full product development);
d) outsourced activities (e.g. testing, independent verification and validation, facilities management);
e) tools intended to assist in the development of software (e.g. design and development or configuration
management tools, code analysers, debuggers, test analysers, generators, compilers);
f) computer and communications hardware;
g) key components (e.g. integrated circuits may be subject to change or to uncertain continued
availability);
h) user and product documentation;
i) training courses and materials.
The type and extent of control to be exercised by the organization over a supplier of subcontracted
design or development (e.g. joint projects) becomes especially important when selecting the supplier,
because confidence in the relationship may be critical to the success of the development.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 29

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
In developing, supplying, installing and maintaining software products, consideration about purchased
products may require the organization to manage the risks associated with licensing, maintenance,
help desk, and customer support services (such as concern for continued availability of support for
purchased product as a result of later releases). One way of determining the capability of suppliers to
provide an acceptable product may be by performing process assessment. Process assessment provides
information for risk assessment and a view of maturity and capability level of the supplier’s processes.
7.4.1.2 Purchased product control
Where the products listed in 7.4.1.1 h) to i) are purchased and intended to become part of the product,
they should be controlled as components throughout the design and development. Contractual
considerations should be addressed to ensure that such controls are in place to ensure configuration
management is effective.
Care should be taken to ensure that contract staff have the specific skills and the levels of competence
required prior to being integrated as part of the project team.
Re-evaluation of suppliers’ performance may be conducted by regular review and control during design
and development as part of project management (see 7.3.1).
In some circumstances, the whole of ISO 9001:2008 may apply to the organization–supplier relationship.
The management of risk is often more critical in software development because of the nature of the
product.
The supplier may be selected based upon the evaluation of the supplier’s proposals and process
capabilities, and other factors, such as analysis of a supplier’s performance history, review of the
responses to the supplier questionnaire, and review of software-related quality and verification plans.
NOTE 1 For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.1.1 (Acquisition Process).
NOTE 2 For further information on assessing process capability of a supplier, see ISO/IEC 15504-3.[12]
7.4.2 Purchasing information
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.4.2 Purchasing information
Purchasing information shall describe the product to be purchased, including, where appropriate,
a) requirements for approval of product, procedures, processes and equipment,
b) requirements for qualification of personnel, and
c) quality management system requirements.
The organization shall ensure the adequacy of specified purchase requirements prior to their
communication to the supplier.
Purchasing information for software may include, where applicable
a) identification of the product ordered (such as product name, number, version, configuration),
b) requirements or the procedure to identify requirements where not fixed at the time of order,
c) standards to be applied (e.g. communications protocol, architectural specification, coding
standards),
d) procedures and/or work instructions the supplier is instructed to follow,
e) description of the development environment (e.g. hardware, development tools, facilities),
f) description of the target environment (e.g. hardware, operating system), and
﻿
30 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
g) requirements on personnel (e.g. prerequisite training, product knowledge).
The considerations covered in 7.2.2 may also be applied to subcontracts.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.1.1.3.1 (Acquisition Preparation) and 6.1.1.3.2
(Acquisition Advertisement).
7.4.3 Verification of purchased product
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.4.3 Verification of purchased product
The organization shall establish and implement the inspection or other activities necessary for
ensuring that purchased product meets specified purchase requirements.
Where the organization or its customer intends to perform verification at the supplier’s premises, the
organization shall state the intended verification arrangements and method of product release in the
purchasing information.
This verification can apply to the acceptance testing of purchased software used in development.
Much of such software is impossible to verify thoroughly because of its extensive functionality. The
organization is entitled to assume a degree of suitability but should conduct acceptance testing and
ensure the availability of adequate support.
Where part of the software development has been subcontracted, or where the purchase of associated
hardware and software is involved, the organization may need to determine the methods by which
verification, validation and acceptance of the subcontracted work will be achieved. Where software
developed under subcontract has to be integrated with software developed by the organization itself,
other considerations may include the methods and tools used in the development. Inspection by the
organization itself, and possibly by the customer, may be necessary. The general considerations for
testing apply (see 8.2.4).
The organization may be required to acquire and include software products, including data or services
such as contract staff, supplied by a third party. The organization should verify product and services
upon receipt, taking into account the requirements of the contract. The methods to verify the product
may need to be defined as part of the purchasing requirements (such as acceptance testing). The
guidance on verification and validation provided in 7.3.5 and 7.3.6 should be considered. For contract
staffing, consideration should be given to the education, training, skills and experience of such staff, in
such topics as programming language, development tools and system management.
When purchasing or obtaining data, careful consideration should be given to the format, medium,
volume, source and content of data obtained (e.g. test data obtained from a third party). Data protection
regulatory requirements may be relevant in some cases (e.g. privacy).
When purchasing software products, consideration should be given to the format and medium on which
it is supplied to ensure operational requirements have been met. The functional and performance
requirements of the product should be tested before use to ensure that the product performs as specified.
The product may also need to be validated against the needs of the final product it is required to satisfy.
Since it may not always be possible to test the product at the point of receipt, it is important to ensure
that it is tested before use or incorporation into the final product. Such tests may need to be conducted at
the supplier’s premises. When on the organization’s premises, consideration should be given to ensuring
that appropriate measures are in place to segregate the product until certainty about its integrity can be
determined (e.g. virus infections).
Records of qualification and training records may be used to assist with verification of contract staff.
NOTE 1 For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.1.1.3.6 (Acquisition — Acquirer acceptance).
NOTE 2 For further general guidance related to ISO 9001:2008, 7.4, see the following:
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 31

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
— ISO/IEC 25010:2011[24] for guidance on quality characteristics appropriate to purchasing software
product;
— ISO/IEC 25040[25] and 25041;[26]
— ISO/IEC 19761:2011,[18] ISO/IEC 20926:2009[19] a nd I SO/IEC 20968:2002[20] for guidance on
estimation of size methods.
7.5 Production and service provision
7.5.1 Control of production and service provision
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.5.1 Control of production and service provisions
The organization shall plan and carry out production and service provision under controlled
conditions. Controlled conditions shall include, as applicable,
a) the availability of information that describes the characteristics of the product,
b) the availability of work instructions, as necessary,
c) the use of suitable equipment,
d) the availability and use of monitoring and measuring equipment,
e) the implementation of monitoring and measurement, and
f) the implementation of product release, delivery and post-delivery activities.
7.5.1.1 Production and service provision in software
As stated in the guidance for design and development (see 7.3), a software development project should
be organized according to a set of processes, which transform the requirements into a software product.
The “control of production and service provision” requirements specified in ISO 9001:2008, 7.5.1 is
equivalent for software products to
a) release activities, e.g. build, release, and replication,
b) delivery activities, e.g. delivery and installation, and
c) post-delivery activities, e.g. operations, maintenance and customer support (these apply throughout
the life of the product).
7.5.1.2 Build and release
Processes should be set up for build, release and replication of the software item(s). Build and release
invoke configuration management (see 7.5.3).
The following provisions are appropriate to build and release:
a) identification of the software items that constitute each release, including associated build
instructions;
b) identification of the types (or classes) of release, depending on the frequency and/or impact on the
customer’s operations and ability to implement changes at any point in time;
c) decision criteria and guidance to determine where localized temporary fixes may be incorporated
or release of a complete updated copy of the software product is necessary.
﻿
32 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.5.1.3 Replication
Where required, the organization should establish and perform replication, considering the following to
ensure that replication is conducted correctly:
a) identification of the master and the copies, including format, variant and version;
b) the type of media for each software item and associated labelling;
c) the stipulation of required documentation such as manuals, user guides, licences and release notes,
including identification and packaging;
d) controlling the environment under which the replication is effected to ensure repeatability;
e) provision for ensuring correctness and completeness of the copies of the product.
7.5.1.4 Delivery
Delivery may be achieved by physical movement of media containing software or by electronic
transmission.
The preservation of items during delivery is covered in 7.5.5.
7.5.1.5 Installation
Sometimes, customers or third parties conduct installation. In this case the role of the organization is to
describe the steps the customer, or third party, needs to take to perform the installation. Sometimes, the
installation is conducted by the organization. For the latter case, the following may apply:
a) the organization and customer should agree on their respective roles, responsibilities and
obligations;
b) the need and extent of validation at each installation should be defined;
c) the need for installation instructions should be defined;
d) the need for configuration of the software and hardware for the specific installation should be
defined;
e) the need for data capture and/or conversion and database population should be defined;
f) the acceptance procedure of each installation upon completion should be defined;
g) a schedule is needed;
h) access to customer’s facilities and equipment should be arranged (e.g. security badges, passwords,
escorts);
i) the availability of skilled personnel should be established;
j) the need to provide training associated with the specific intended use of the product during
installation or as part of maintenance should be defined;
k) the need to perform backup and confirm recovery should be defined.
The introduction of a new software product or new software release at multiple user sites can require
planning of implementation or rollout.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 33

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.5.1.6 Operations
A software-producing organization should plan and control operations, including:
a) the need to set up a help desk to conduct telephone or other electronic communication with the
customer(s), and
b) arrangements for ensuring continuity of support, such as disaster recovery, security and backup
(see 6.3).
7.5.1.7 Maintenance
Maintenance of the software product that is requested by the customer for specific items, and
a specific period of time, after initial delivery and installation, should be stipulated in the contract.
The organization should establish a process for performing maintenance activities and verifying
them. Maintenance activities may also be performed on the development environment, tools and
documentation. Maintenance should include the following, as appropriate:
a) scope of maintenance;
b) identification of the initial status of the maintained items;
c) support organization(s) and arrangements (see also 7.5.1.6);
d) maintenance activities including problem resolution, help desk support, hardware support and
system monitoring to detect failure;
e) interface modifications that may be required when additions or changes are made to the hardware
system, or components, controlled by the software;
f) configuration management, testing and quality assurance activities;
g) proposed release schedule;
h) how functional expansion and performance improvement will be carried out;
i) maintenance records and reports.
The records of the maintenance activities may be utilized for evaluation and enhancement of the software
product and for improvement of the quality management system itself. When resolving problems,
temporary fixes may be used to minimize downtime and permanent modifications carried out later.
For interface modifications and functional expansion, depending upon the scale of work, change control
procedures should apply, or a new and separate development project should be initiated.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.4.7 (Software Installation), 6.4.9.3.4 (Customer
Support), 6.4.10 (Software Maintenance Process), 7.2.3.3.3 (Process Assurance), and 7.2.8 (Software Problem
Resolution Process).
﻿
34 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.5.2 Validation of processes for production and service provision
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.5.2 Validation of processes for production and service provision
The organization shall validate any processes for production and service provision where the
resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent monitoring or measurement and, as a consequence,
deficiencies become apparent only after the product is in use or the service has been delivered.
Validation shall demonstrate the ability of these processes to achieve planned results.
The organization shall establish arrangements for these processes including, as applicable,
a) defined criteria for review and approval of the processes,
b) approval of equipment and qualification of personnel,
c) use of specific methods and procedures,
d) requirements for records (see 4.2.4), and
e) revalidation.
The organization should consider what processes may be used to compensate for the inability to validate
fully the product. Examples include the following:
a) a design and development review might consider how the design and development might fail in
addition to the more normal check that the design and development will function correctly;
b) a program of failure mode and effect analyses that builds up a history of design and development
failures and how they can be avoided.
Whatever methods are used, they should be commensurate with the risks and consequences of design
and development failures.
7.5.3 Identification and traceability
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.5.3 Identification and traceability
Where appropriate, the organization shall identify the product by suitable means throughout product
realization.
The organization shall identify the product status with respect to monitoring and measurement
requirements throughout product realization.
Where traceability is a requirement, the organization shall control the unique identification of the
product and maintain records (see 4.2.4).
NOTE In some industry sectors, configuration management is a means by which identification and
traceability are maintained.
7.5.3.1 Overview
For software, identification and traceability is commonly implemented through configuration
management. Configuration management is a management discipline that applies technical and
administrative direction to the design, development and support of configuration items, including
software items. This discipline is also applicable to related documentation (see also 4.2.3) and hardware.
The degree of configuration management use is dependent on the project size, complexity and risk level.
One objective of configuration management is to provide full visibility of the product’s present
configuration and status. Another objective is that everyone working on the product at any time in its
life cycle uses appropriate versions of items.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 35

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
7.5.3.2 Configuration management process
The scope of configuration management should include the following:
a) planning of the process including defining activities, responsibilities and the tools to be procured;
b) identifying uniquely the name and versions of each configuration item and when they are to be
brought under configuration control (configuration identification);
c) identifying the versions of each software item which together constitute a specific version of a
complete product (baseline), including re-used software, libraries, and purchased and customer
supplied software;
d) identifying the build status of software products under development, delivered or installed, for
single or multiple environments, as appropriate;
e) controlling simultaneous updates of a given software item by two or more people working
independently (configuration control);
f) providing coordination for the updating of multiple products in one or more locations as required;
g) identifying, tracking and reporting of the status of items, including all actions and changes
resulting from a change request or problem, from initiation through to release (configuration status
accounting);
h) providing configuration evaluation (status of verification and validation activities);
i) providing release management and delivery.
7.5.3.3 Traceability
Throughout the product life cycle, there should be a process to trace the components of the software item
or product. Such tracing may vary in scope according to the requirements of the contract or marketplace,
from being able to place a certain change request in a specific release, to recording the destination and
usage of each variant of the product.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO 10007:2003[4] (Guidelines For Configuration Management);
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.3.5 and 7.2.2 (Configuration Management Process).
7.5.4 Customer property
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.5.4 Customer property
The organization shall exercise care with customer property while it is under the organization’s
control or being used by the organization. The organization shall identify, verify, protect and
safeguard customer property provided for use or incorporation into the product. If any customer
property is lost, damaged or otherwise found to be unsuitable for use, the organization shall report
this to the customer and maintain records (see 4.2.4).
NOTE Customer property can include intellectual property and personal data.
The organization may be required to acquire and include product and data supplied by the customer,
such as
a) software products including commercial software products supplied by the customer,
b) development tools,
﻿
36 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
c) development environments including network services,
d) test and operational data,
e) interface or other specifications,
f) hardware, and
g) intellectual property, and confidential and proprietary information, including specifications.
In any maintenance agreement consideration should be given to addressing
— required licensing and support, including subsequent revisions to the product, and
— limitations or constraints in re-use of the product in other projects.
The means by which updates to customer-supplied items are accepted and integrated should be defined.
The organization may apply the same kinds of verification activities to customer-supplied product as
to purchased product. This includes requirements for records indicating which changes have been
implemented, and at what locations for multiple products and sites.
The methods for identifying the customer-supplied product should be part of configuration management
for the product (see 7.5.3).
7.5.5 Preservation of product
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.5.5 Preservation of product
The organization shall preserve the product during internal processing and delivery to the intended
destination in order to maintain conformity to requirements. As applicable, preservation shall include
identification, handling, packaging, storage and protection. Preservation shall also apply to the
constituent parts of a product.
A software-producing organization should ensure that its products are not altered from the point of
production, through replication, handling and storage, to the point of delivery. Software information does
not degrade; however, the media on which it is stored may be subject to deterioration, and appropriate
precautions should be taken by the organization.
Delivery should provide for appropriate preventive action to protect the software product from damage.
In addition, an appropriate level of software virus checking and appropriate measures to protect product
integrity are needed. Delivery of software may be achieved by physical movement of media containing
software, or by electronic transmission. The following should be considered, and appropriate actions
taken when handling, packaging, storing or delivering software:
a) storing software items, maintaining versions of products in established baselines;
b) permitting the controlled access to and retrieval of the master and any copies, protecting them from
unauthorized change or corruption;
c) protecting computer media, particularly with respect to computer viruses, electromagnetic and
electrostatic environments;
d) providing for regular backup of software, including off-site storage for disaster recovery;
e) ensuring the timely copying of software to replacement media;
f) storing of software media in a protected environment, preventing deterioration and protecting
from obsolescence;
g) the effects of using compression and decompression techniques (the reduction of the space taken on
a data medium by encoding data, taking advantage of redundancy in the data);
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 37

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
h) the effects of using encryption and decryption techniques (the transformation of data into an
unintelligible form for data security).
NOTE For further general guidance related to ISO 9001:2008, 7.5, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 25010:2011[24] for guidance on quality characteristics of software products;
— ISO/IEC 14764:2006;[8]
— ISO/IEC 26514:2008.[28]
7.6 Control of monitoring and measuring devices
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
7.6 Control of monitoring and measuring equipment
The organization shall determine the monitoring and measurement to be undertaken and the
monitoring and measuring equipment needed to provide evidence of conformity of product to
determined requirements.
The organization shall establish processes to ensure that monitoring and measurement can be
carried out and are carried out in a manner that is consistent with the monitoring and
measurement requirements.
Where necessary to ensure valid results, measuring equipment shall
a) be calibrated or verified, or both, at specified intervals, or prior to use, against measurement
standards traceable to international or national measurement standards; where no such standards
exist, the basis used for calibration or verification shall be recorded (see 4.2.4);
b) be adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary;
c) have identification in order to determine its calibration status;
d) be safeguarded from adjustments that would invalidate the measurement result;
e) be protected from damage and deterioration during handling, maintenance and storage.
In addition, the organization shall assess and record the validity of the previous measuring results
when the equipment is found not to conform to requirements. The organization shall take appropriate
action on the equipment and any product affected.
Records of the results of calibration and verification shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
When used in the monitoring and measurement of specified requirements, the ability of computer
software to satisfy the intended application shall be confirmed. This shall be undertaken prior to
initial use and reconfirmed as necessary.
NOTE Confirmation of the ability of computer software to satisfy the intended application would
typically include its verification and configuration management to maintain its suitability for use.
Calibration is a technique that often has been perceived as not directly applicable to software. However,
it may be applicable to hardware and tools used to test and validate the software. Consequently, items a)
to e) in ISO 9001:2008, 7.6, may be applicable to the environment used when testing the software.
Where the organization uses tools, facilities and techniques in the conduct of any tests verifying
conformance of the software product to specified requirements, the organization should consider the
effect of such tools on the quality of the software product, when approving them. In addition, such tools
may be placed under configuration management prior to use.
Although “adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary” [ISO 9001:2008, 7.6, item b)] is not applicable to
software, there may be a need to verify periodically that software used in measuring devices has not
changed, due to exposure to harsh environments, such as viruses or electromagnetic fields.
﻿
38 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
The suitability of test tools, techniques and data should be verified prior to use, to determine if there is
a need to improve and/or upgrade them. The organization should have procedures for determining how
the test software is checked.
Measuring and monitoring devices used in software development, testing, maintenance and operation
include
a) data used for testing the software product,
b) software tools (e.g. for simulation, collecting performance, resource utilization and coverage
information),
c) computer hardware, and
d) instrumentation interfacing to the computer hardware.
The organization should control measuring and monitoring devices by means of a configuration
management system (see 7.5.3).
8 Measurement, analysis and improvement
8.1 General
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.1 General
The organization shall plan and implement the monitoring, measurement, analysis and improvement
processes needed
a) to demonstrate conformity to product requirements,
b) to ensure conformity of the quality management system, and
c) to continually improve the effectiveness of the quality management system.
This shall include determination of applicable methods, including statistical techniques, and the
extent of their use.
The purpose of the software measurement process is to collect, analyse and report data relating to
the products developed and processes implemented within the organizational unit, to support effective
management of the processes, and to demonstrate objectively the quality of the products.
The monitoring, measurement, analysis and improvement processes should be identified as part of
quality planning (see 7.1.2).
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.2.1.3.3 (Improvement) and 6.3.7 (Measurement Process)
— ISO/IEC 15939:2007;[15]
— ISO/IEC 15504–1;[10]
— ISO/IEC/TR 9126–2:2003[1] and ISO/IEC/TR 9126–3:2003[2] (Product quality — Internal and external
metrics);
— ISO/IEC 25001:2007.[23]
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 39

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
8.2 Monitoring and measurement
8.2.1 Customer satisfaction
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.2.1 Customer satisfaction
As one of the measurements of the performance of the quality management system, the organization
shall monitor information relating to customer perception as to whether the organization has met
customer requirements. The methods for obtaining and using this information shall be determined.
NOTE Monitoring customer perception can include obtaining input from sources such as customer
satisfaction surveys, customer data on delivered product quality, user opinion surveys, lost business
analysis, compliments, warranty claims and dealer reports.
The organization’s process for requesting, measuring and monitoring feedback of customer satisfaction
should provide information on a continual or periodic basis as appropriate. For software consider, for
example:
a) analysis of help desk calls relating to both product quality and service performance,
b) quality-in-use metrics derived from customer direct and indirect feedback,
c) other quality metrics based on use of the product, and
d) number of software releases needed to fix problems, after initial delivery.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC/TR 9126–4[3] (Product quality — Quality-in-use metrics).
8.2.2 Internal audit
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.2.2 Internal audit
The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether the quality
management system
a) conforms to the planned arrangements (see 7.1), to the requirements of this International
Standard and to the quality management system requirements established by the
organization, and
b) is effectively implemented and maintained.
An audit programme shall be planned, taking into consideration the status and importance of the
processes and areas to be audited, as well as the results of previous audits. The audit criteria, scope,
frequency and methods shall be defined. The selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall ensure
objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own work.
A documented procedure shall be established to define the responsibilities and requirements for
planning and conducting audits, establishing records and reporting results.
Records of the audits and their results shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
The management responsible for the area being audited shall ensure that any necessary corrections
and corrective actions are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected nonconformities and their
causes. Follow-up activities shall include the verification of the actions taken and the reporting of
verification results (see 8.5.2).
NOTE See ISO 19011 for guidance.
When software organizations separate their work into projects, audit planning should define a selection
of projects and assess both the compliance of their project quality planning to the organization’s quality
﻿
40 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
management system and the compliance of the project to the project quality planning. This selection
should ensure coverage of all stages and all processes.
This may necessitate auditing various projects at different stages of their product development life cycle,
or auditing a single project as it progresses through various stages. Where the intended project changes
its timescale, the internal audit schedule may be reviewed, either to change the timing of the audit or to
consider a different project.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 7.2.3 (Software Quality Assurance Process) and
7.2.7 (Software Audit Process).
8.2.3 Monitoring and measurement of processes
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.2.3 Monitoring and measurement of processes
The organization shall apply suitable methods for monitoring and, where applicable, measurement of
the quality management system processes. These methods shall demonstrate the ability of the
processes to achieve planned results. When planned results are not achieved, correction and
corrective action shall be taken, as appropriate.
NOTE When determining suitable methods, it is advisable that the organization consider the type
and extent of monitoring or measurement appropriate to each of its processes in relation to their
impact on the conformity to product requirements and on the effectiveness of the quality
management system.
Organizations normally measure some aspects of their processes in order to monitor, manage and assess
them. The most frequent measures include
a) the planned and actual duration of a process activity,
b) the planned and actual cost of a process activity, and
c) the planned quality levels and progressive measures of the selected quality characteristics.
NOTE 1 For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.2.1.3.2 (Process Assessment) and 6.2.1.3.3
(process improvement).
NOTE 2 For guidance on conducting software process assessment, see ISO/IEC 15504–1,[10] and that on
performing an assessment, see ISO/IEC 15504–2.[11] S ee a lso I SO/IEC 15939:2007,[15] Clause 5 (Software
Measurement Process).
8.2.4 Monitoring and measurement of product
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.2.4 Monitoring and measurement of product
The organization shall monitor and measure the characteristics of the product to verify that product
requirements have been met. This shall be carried out at appropriate stages of the product realization
process in accordance with the planned arrangements (see 7.1). Evidence of conformity with the
acceptance criteria shall be maintained.
Records shall indicate the person(s) authorizing release of product for delivery to the customer
(see 4.2.4).
The release of product and delivery of service to the customer shall not proceed until the planned
arrangements (see 7.1) have been satisfactorily completed, unless otherwise approved by a relevant
authority and, where applicable, by the customer.
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 41

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
An organization should monitor and measure the conformity of products to quality requirements by
means such as review, verification and validation. Examples of product characteristics that may be
monitored or measured include:
a) functionality,
b) maintainability,
c) efficiency,
d) portability,
e) usability, and
f) reliability.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207:2008,[5] 6.4 (Technical Processes), which contains provisions for evaluation of
software products during development and when completed;
— ISO/IEC 25010:2011;[24]
— ISO/IEC 25040[25] and 25041.[26]
8.3 Control of nonconforming product
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.3 Control of nonconforming product
The organization shall ensure that product which does not conform to product requirements is
identified and controlled to prevent its unintended use or delivery. A documented procedure shall be
established to define the controls and related responsibilities and authorities for dealing with
nonconforming product.
Where applicable, the organization shall deal with nonconforming product by one or more of the
following ways:
a) by taking action to eliminate the detected nonconformity;
b) by authorizing its use, release or acceptance under concession by a relevant authority and, where
applicable, by the customer;
c) by taking action to preclude its original intended use or application;
d) by taking action appropriate to the effects, or potential effects, of the nonconformity when
nonconforming product is detected after delivery or use has started.
When nonconforming product is corrected it shall be subject to re-verification to demonstrate
conformity to the requirements.
Records of the nature of nonconformities and any subsequent actions taken, including concessions
obtained, shall be maintained (see 4.2.4).
In software development, segregation of nonconforming items may be effected by transferring the
item out of a production or testing environment, into a separate environment. In the case of embedded
software it may become necessary to segregate the nonconforming item (hardware) which contains the
nonconforming software.
The supplier should identify at what points control and recording of nonconforming product is required.
Where a software item manifests a defect during development or maintenance, the investigation and
resolution of such defects should be controlled and recorded.
Configuration management may be invoked to implement part of or the whole of this requirement.
﻿
42 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Attention should be paid to the following aspects in the disposition of nonconformities:
a) any discovered problems and their possible impacts on any other parts of the software should be
noted and those responsible notified so the problems can be tracked until they are resolved;
b) areas impacted by any modifications should be identified and re-tested, and the method for
determining the scope of re-testing should be identified in a documented procedure;
c) the priority of the nonconformities should be established.
With software, repair or rework to achieve fulfilment of specified requirements creates a new software
version. In software development, disposition of nonconforming product may be achieved by:
a) repair or rework (i.e. to fix defects) to meet the requirement,
b) acceptance with or without repair by concession,
c) treatment as a conforming product after the amendment of requirements, and
d) rejection.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207:2008,[5] 6.3.5 and 7.2.2 (Configuration Management Process) and 7.2.8 (Problem
Resolution Process);
— ISO/IEC 25051:2006.[27]
8.4 Analysis of data
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.4 Analysis of data
The organization shall determine, collect and analyse appropriate data to demonstrate the suitability
and effectiveness of the quality management system and to evaluate where continual improvement of
the effectiveness of the quality management system can be made. This shall include data generated as
a result of monitoring and measurement and from other relevant sources.
The analysis of data shall provide information relating to
a) customer satisfaction (see 8.2.1),
b) conformity to product requirements (see 8.2.4),
c) characteristics and trends of processes and products, including opportunities for preventive
action (see 8.2.3 and 8.2.4), and
d) suppliers (see 7.4).
Examples of “analysis of data” for software may include problem reports from various levels of testing
and issues identified in reviews or walkthroughs.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 15939:2007,[15] 4.4 (Software measurement process — Evaluate results);
— ISO/IEC 19761:2011,[18] ISO/IEC 20926:2009[21] and ISO/IEC 20968:2002.[20]
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 43

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
8.5 Improvement
8.5.1 Continual improvement
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.5.1 Continual improvement
The organization shall continually improve the effectiveness of the quality management system
through the use of the quality policy, quality objectives, audit results, analysis of data, corrective and
preventive actions and management review.
A strategic approach to process improvement may be achieved by establishing an improvement process.
This can be applied to any or all of the software life cycle processes and involves process establishment,
process assessment and process improvement.
NOTE For further information, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.2.1.3.3 (Process Improvement);
— ISO/IEC 15504 (all parts) (Software Process Assessment).
8.5.2 Corrective action
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.5.2 Corrective action
The organization shall take action to eliminate the causes of nonconformities in order to prevent
recurrence. Corrective actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the nonconformities encountered.
A documented procedure shall be established to define requirements for
a) reviewing nonconformities (including customer complaints),
b) determining the causes of nonconformities,
c) evaluating the need for action to ensure that nonconformities do not recur,
d) determining and implementing action needed,
e) records of the results of action taken (see 4.2.4), and
f) reviewing the effectiveness of the corrective action taken.
Where corrective action directly affects the software products, configuration management may be
invoked to manage the changes. Management should review corrective actions that involve changes to
the software life cycle processes. An organization’s procedures for corrective action should take into
account the requirement to prevent recurrence.
NOTE For further information, see ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 7.2.8 (Software Problem Resolution Process).
﻿
44 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
8.5.3 Preventive action
ISO 9001:2008, Quality management systems requirements
8.5.3 Preventive action
The organization shall determine action to eliminate the causes of potential nonconformities in order
to prevent their occurrence. Preventive actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the potential
problems.
A documented procedure shall be established to define requirements for
a) determining potential nonconformities and their causes,
b) evaluating the need for action to prevent occurrence of nonconformities,
c) determining and implementing action needed,
d) records of results of action taken (see 4.2.4), and
e) reviewing the effectiveness of the preventive action taken.
Process assessment may be useful in the gathering of data to anticipate problems (see 8.2.3).
NOTE For further general guidance related to ISO 9001:2008, 8.5, see the following:
— ISO/IEC 12207:2008,[5] 6.2.1.3.3 (Process Improvement);
— ISO/IEC 15504–2.[11]
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 45

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Annex A
(informative)
Summary of guidance in the implementation of ISO 9001:2008
available in ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 7 and ISO/TC 176 standards
Table A.1 summarizes the documents referenced in the body of this International Standard as well as
the sub-clause numbers of references to ISO/IEC 12207:2008. The information in this table is intended
as a summary of the body of the document. In the event of any disagreement, the references in the main
body should be considered as the correct ones.
Table A.1 — Additional guidance in the implementation of ISO 9001:2008 available in
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 7 and ISO/TC 176 standards
ISO 9001:2008 ISO/IEC 12207 clauses Other documents
4.1 General requirements General 24748–1,[21] 24748–3[22]
4.2 Documentation requirements 6.3.6, 7.2.1
5.4.1 Quality objectives 15504,[10],[11],[12],[13],[14]
25010[24]
6.2.1 General 6.2.4
6.3 Infrastructure 6.2.2 25001,[23] 25040,[25] 25041,[26]
14102[6]
7.1 Planning of product realization 6.1.2.3.4.5, 7.1.1.3.1.4,
7.2.3.3.1.3
16326,[17] 25001,[23] 25010[24]
7.2.1 Determination of requirements related
to the product
6.4.2, 7.1.2 15026–3,[9] 25010,[24] 25051[27]
7.2.2 Review of requirements related to the
product
6.1.2, 7.2.4.3.2, 7.2.6, 6.3.4 16085,[16] 29148,[29] 25010[24]
7.2.3 Customer communication 7.2.6, 6.1.2, 6.4.9.3.4 14764[8]
7.3.1.1 Design and development planning 6.1.2.3.4.5, 7.1.1.3.1.4,
7.2.3.3.1.3
7.3.1.4 Interfaces 6.3.1 16326[17]
7.3.2 Design and development inputs 25010[24]
7.3.3 Design and development outputs 7.1.3, 7.1.5
7.3.4 Design and development review 7.1.2.3.1.2, 7.1.3.3.1.6,
7.1.4.3.1.7, 7.2.6
7.3.5 Design and development verification 6.4, 7.2.4
7.3.6 Design and development validation 6.4, 7.2.5 25010[24]
7.3.7 Control of design and development
changes
5.5.2 5.5.3, 6.1, 6.2, F.2.1,
F.2.2
14759,[7] 19761,[18] 20926,[19]
20968,[20] 25051,[27] 26514[28]
7.4.1 Purchasing process 6.1.1 15504–3[12]
7.4.2 Purchasing information 6.1.1.3
7.4.3 Verification of purchased product 6.1.1.3.6 19761,[18] 20926,[19] 20968,[20]
25010.[24] 25040,[25] 25041[26]
7.5.1 Control of production and service provision
6.4.7, 6.4.9.3.4, 6.4.10,
7.2.3.3.3, 7.2.8
﻿
46 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
ISO 9001:2008 ISO/IEC 12207 clauses Other documents
7.5.3 Identification and traceability 6.6.3.5, 7.2.2 10007[4]
7.5.5 Preservation of product 14764,[8] 25010,[24] 26514[28]
8.1 General 6.2.1.3.3 9126–2,[1] 9126–3,[2] 15504–
1,[10] 15939,[15] 25001[23]
8.2.1 Customer satisfaction 9126–4[3]
8.2.2 Internal audit 7.2.3, 7.2.7
8.2.3 Monitoring and measurement of processes
6.2.1.3.2, 6.2.1.3.3 15504–1,[10] 15504–2,[11]
15939[15]
8.2.4 Monitoring and measurement of product 6.4 25010,[24] 25040,[25] 25041[26]
8.3 Control of nonconforming product 6.3.5, 7.2.2, 7.2.8 25051[27]
8.4 Analysis of data 15939,[15] 19761,[18] 20926,[19]
20968[20]
8.5.1 Continual improvement 6.2.1.3.3 15504[10],[11],[12],[13],[14]
8.5.2 Corrective action 7.2.8
8.5.3 Preventive action 6.2.1.3.2 15504–2[11]
﻿
Table A.1 (continued)
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 47

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Annex B
(informative)
Planning in ISO/IEC 90003 and ISO/IEC 12207
ISO/IEC 12207:2008 includes quality planning and development planning as a single planning activity
leading to the creation of project management plan(s). The following table provides a mapping to show
how the items 7.1.2, 7.3.1 and 7.3.4 of this International Standard are satisfied by the related items in
ISO/IEC 12207:2008, 6.1.2.3.4.5, 7.1.1.3.1.4 and 7.2.3.3.1.3 (and other subclauses as referred to in notes).
Additionally, this Annex covers project management and technical reviews from ISO/IEC 12207:2008,
7.2.6, which are reviews in design and development in ISO 9001:2008, 7.3.4.
Table B.1 — Mapping between ISO/IEC 90003 and ISO/IEC 12207
ISO/IEC 90003 reference ISO/IEC 12207:2008 reference
7.1.2 Planning of product realization
a) inclusion of, or reference to, the plans for development
(see 7.3.1);
7.1.1.3.1.4 The implementer shall develop plans for
conducting the activities of the Software Implementation
process.
b) quality requirements related to the product and/or processes;
6.1.2.3.4.5 e) Management of the quality characteristics of
the software products or services. Separate plans for quality
may be developed.
6.1.2.3.4.5 f) Management of the safety, security, and other
critical requirements of the software products or services.
Separate plans for safety and security may be developed.
c) quality management system tailoring and/or identification
of specific procedures and instructions, appropriate to
the scope of the quality manual and any stated exclusions (see
ISO 9001:2008, 1.2);
NOTE This is not addressed specifically because ISO/
IEC 12207 applies at the project level. However the interface
to the organizational QMS is provided by 6.2.5 Quality
Management Process.
d) project-specific procedures and instructions, such as software
test specifications detailing plans, designs, test cases
and procedures for unit, integration, system and acceptance
testing (see 8.2.4);
NOTE Covered in 7.1.1.3.1.3 of the software implementation
process and 7.2.1, software documentation management
process, which is invoked across development
activities.
e) methods, life cycle model(s), tools, programming language
conventions, libraries, frameworks and other reusable assets
to be used in the project;
7.2.3.3.1.3 a) Quality standards, methodologies, procedures,
and tools for performing the quality assurance
activities (or their references in organization’s official
documentation).
6.1.2.3.4.5 b) Engineering environment (for development,
operation, or maintenance, as applicable), including test
environment, library, equipment, facilities, standards,
procedures, and tools;
f) criteria for starting and ending each project stage; NOTE Covered in 7.2.6, software review process.
g) types of review, and other verification and validation
activities to be carried out (see 7.3.4, 7.3.5 and 7.3.6);
6.1.2.3.4.5 g) Quality assurance (see clause 7.2.3).
6.1.2.3.4.5 h) Verification (see clause 7.2.4) and validation
(see clause 7.2.5); including the approach for interfacing
with the verification and validation agent, if specified.
7.2.3.3.1.3 e) Selected activities and tasks from supporting
processes, such as Software Verification (clause
7.2.4), Software Validation (clause 7.2.5), Software Review
(clause 7.2.6), Software Audit (clause 7.2.7), and Software
Problem Resolution (clause 7.2.8).
h) configuration management procedures to be carried out
(see 7.5.3);
NOTE Covered in 6.3.5, configuration management process
and 7.2.2 software configuration management process;
and invoked in 7.1.1.3.1.2 b) in implementation.
﻿
48 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
ISO/IEC 90003 reference ISO/IEC 12207:2008 reference
i) monitoring and measurement activities to be carried out; NOTE Monitoring is part of 6.1.2.3.4.8 in the supply
process and measurement is part of product and process
assurance in 7.2.3.3.3.5.
j) the person(s) responsible for approving the outputs of
processes for subsequent use;
NOTE Where outputs of processes are documents this is
covered by 7.2.1.3.2.3 in the documentation process.
k) training needs in the use of tools and techniques, and
scheduling of the training before the skill is needed;
6.1.2.3.4.5 o) Training of personnel (see clause 6.2.4).
l) records to be maintained (see 4.2.4); 7.2.3.3.1.3 c) Procedures for identification, collection, filing,
maintenance, and disposition of quality records.
m) change management, such as for resources, timescale and
contract changes.
NOTE Covered in 6.1.1.3.4.3 as a change control mechanism
between the acquirer and supplier.
7.3.1 Design and development planning
a) the activities of requirements analysis, design and development,
coding, integration, testing, installation and support
for acceptance of software products; this includes the identification
of, or reference to:
1) activities to be carried out;
2) required inputs to each activity;
3) required outputs from each activity;
4) verification required for each activity output [as 7.1.2 g)
see also 7.3.5];
5) management and supporting activities to be carried out;
6) required team training [as 7.1.2 k)].
6.1.2.3.4.5 o) Training of personnel (see clause 6.2.4).
7.2.3.3.1.3 e) Selected activities and tasks from supporting
processes, such as Software Verification (clause
7.2.4), Software Validation (clause 7.2.5), Software Review
(clause 7.2.6), Software Audit (clause 7.2.7), and Software
Problem Resolution (clause 7.2.8).
NOTE Specific requirements are included in activities and
tasks of 7, software life cycle processes, as well as 6.4.9,
software operation process, and 6.4.10, software maintenance
process, rather than as a planning activity.
b) planning for the control of product and service provision; NOTE This term from ISO 9001:2008 is not used in ISO/
IEC 12207. It equates to all release, delivery and postdelivery
activities, including software installation (6.4.7),
software acceptance support (6.4.8) and including operation
(6.4.9) and maintenance (6.4.10) processes as well as
configuration management (6.3.5 and 7.2.2). These are
specific requirements of ISO/IEC 12207 subclauses rather
than a planning activity.
c) the organization of the project resources, including the
team structure, responsibilities, use of suppliers and material
resources to be used;
6.1.2.3.4.5 a) Project organizational structure and authority
and responsibility of each organizational unit, including
external organizations.
d) organizational and technical interfaces between different
individuals or groups, such as sub-project teams, suppliers,
partners, users, customer representatives, quality assurance
representative (see 7.3.1.4);
6.1.2.3.4.5 i) Acquirer involvement; that is, by such means
as reviews (see clause 7.2.6), audits (see clause 7.2.7), informal
meetings, reporting, modification and change; implementation,
approval, acceptance, and access to facilities.
6.1.2.3.4.5 j) User involvement; by such means as requirements
setting exercises, prototype demonstrations and
evaluations.
e) the analysis of the possible risks, assumptions, dependencies
and problems associated with the design and development;
6.1.2.3.4.5 k) Risk management; that is management of the
areas of the project that involve potential technical, cost, or
schedule risks.
NOTE Problems are covered by the problem resolution
process (7.2.8).
﻿
Table B.1 (continued)
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 49

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
ISO/IEC 90003 reference ISO/IEC 12207:2008 reference
f) the schedule identifying:
1) the stages of the project [see also 7.1.2j)];
2) the work breakdown structure;
3) the associated resources and timing;
4) the associated dependencies;
5) the milestones;
6) verification and validation activities [as 7.1.2g)].
6.1.2.3.4.5 c) Work breakdown structure of the life cycle
processes and activities, including the software products,
software services and non-deliverable items, to be performed
together with budgets, staffing, physical resources,
software size, and schedules associated with the tasks.
6.1.2.3.4.5 n) Means for scheduling, tracking, and reporting.
7.2.3.3.1.3 d) Resources, schedule, and responsibilities for
conducting the quality assurance activities.
g) the identification of:
1) standards, rules, practices and conventions, methodology,
life cycle model, statutory and regulatory requirements
[as 7.1.2d) and e)];
2) tools and techniques for development, including the
qualification of, and configuration controls placed on, such
tools and techniques;
3) facilities, hardware and software for development;
4) configuration management practices [as 7.1.2h)];
5) method of controlling nonconforming software products;
6) methods of control for software used to support development;
7) procedures for archiving, back-up, recovery, and controlling
access to software products;
8) methods of control for virus protection;
9) security controls;
7.1.1.3.1.3 The implementer shall develop plans for
conducting the activities of the Software Implementation
process. The plans should include specific standards, methods,
tools, actions, and responsibility associated with the
development and qualification of all requirements including
safety and security. If necessary, separate plans may be
developed. These plans shall be documented and executed.
6.1.2.3.4.5 m) Approval required by such means as regulations,
required certifications, proprietary, usage, ownership,
warranty and licensing rights.
h) the identification of related planning (including planning
of the system) addressing topics such as quality (see 7.1), risk
management, configuration management, supplier management,
integration, testing (see 7.3.6), release management,
installation, training, migration, maintenance, re-use, communication
and measurement;
6.1.2.3.4.5 g) Quality assurance (see clause 7.2.3).
6.1.2.3.4.5 k) Risk management; that is management of the
areas of the project that involve potential technical, cost, or
schedule risks.
6.1.2.3.4.5 l) Security policy; that is, the rules for need-toknow
and access-to-information at each project organization
level.
NOTE ISO 9001:2008 does not require contract review
procedures but includes in 7.2.2 a) the requirement to review
requirements before acceptance of a contract.
7.2.3.3.1.3 c) Procedures for contract review and coordination
thereof.
7.3.4 Design and development review
Review of design and development should be performed in
accordance with planned arrangements. The elements of the
review to be considered are the following:
7.2.6.3.1.1 Periodic reviews shall be held at predetermined
milestones as specified in the project plan(s). Stakeholders
should determine the need for any ad hoc reviews in which
agreeing parties may participate.
a) what is to be reviewed, when and the type of review, such
as demonstrations, formal proof of correctness, inspections,
walkthroughs and joint reviews;
7.2.6.3.1.3 The parties that participate in a review should
agree on the following items at each review: meeting
agenda, software products (results of an activity) and problems
to be reviewed; scope and procedures; and entry and
exit criteria for the review.
b) what functional groups would be concerned in each type
of review and, if there is to be a review meeting, how it is to
be organized and conducted;
7.2.6.3.1.2 All resources that are required to conduct the
reviews shall be provided. These resources include personnel,
location, facilities, hardware, software, and tools.
Also 7.2.6.3.1.3 as above.
﻿
Table B.1 (continued)
50 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
ISO/IEC 90003 reference ISO/IEC 12207:2008 reference
c) what records have to be produced, e.g. meeting minutes,
issues, problems, actions and action status;
7.2.6.3.1.4 Problems detected during the reviews shall be
recorded and entered into the Software Problem Resolution
Process (clause 7.2.8) as required.
7.2.6.3.1.5 The review results shall be documented and
distributed. This communication includes adequacy of
review (for example, approval, disapproval, or contingent
approval) of the review results.
d) the methods for monitoring the application of rules, practices
and conventions to ensure requirements are met;
7.2.6.3.3.1 Technical reviews shall be held to evaluate the
software products or services under consideration and provide
evidence that: ... b) They comply with their standards
and specifications.
e) what has to be done prior to the conduct of a review, such
as establishment of objectives, meeting agenda, documents
required and roles of review personnel;
7.2.6.3.1.3 The parties that participate in a review should
agree on the following items at each review: meeting
agenda, software products (results of an activity) and problems
to be reviewed; scope and procedures; and entry and
exit criteria for the review.
7.2.6.3.1.2 All resources that are required to conduct the
reviews shall be provided. These resources include personnel,
location, facilities, hardware, software, and tools.
f) what has to be done during the review, including the techniques
to be used and guidelines for all participants;
7.2.6.3.1.3 The parties that participate in a review should
agree on the following items at each review: ... scope and
procedures...
g) the success criteria for the review; 7.2.6.3.1.3 (end) ... and entry and exit criteria for the
review.
h) what follow-up activities are used to ensure that issues
identified at the review are resolved.
7.2.6.3.1.6 Participating parties shall agree on the outcome
of the review and any action item responsibilities and
closure criteria.
﻿
Table B.1 (continued)
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 51

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
ISO/IEC 90003 reference ISO/IEC 12207:2008 reference
NOTE ISO 9001:2008 does not distinguish between project
management and technical reviews. This is often very useful
for software projects. Although not included in detail in the
guidance for ISO 9001:2008 in this International Standard, it
may be appropriate and useful to use the ISO/IEC 12207 view
of these separate review mechanisms.
7.2.6.3.2 Project Management Reviews. This activity consists
of the following task:
7.2.6.3.2.1 Project status shall be evaluated relative to
the applicable project plans, schedules, standards, and
guidelines. The outcome of the review should be considered
by appropriate management and should provide for the
following:
a) Making activities progress according to plan, based on
an evaluation of the activity or software product status.
b) Maintaining global control of the project through
adequate allocation of resources.
c) Changing project direction or determining the need for
alternate planning.
d) Evaluating and managing the risk issues that may
jeopardize the success of the project.
NOTE ISO 9001:2008 does not distinguish between project
management and technical reviews. This is often very useful
for software projects. Although not included in detail in the
guidance for ISO 9001:2008 in this International Standard, it
may be appropriate and useful to use the ISO/IEC 12207 view
of these separate review mechanisms.
7.2.6.3.3 Technical Reviews. This activity consists of the
following task:
7.2.6.3.3.1 Technical reviews shall be held to evaluate the
software products or services under consideration and
provide evidence that:
a) They are complete.
b) They comply with their standards and specifications.
c) Changes to them are properly implemented and affect
only those areas identified by the Configuration Management
Process (clause 7.2.2).
d) They are adhering to applicable schedules.
e) They are ready for the next planned activity.{Editor:
This came from Amd 1}
f) The development, operation, or maintenance is being
conducted according to the plans, schedules, standards,
and guidelines of the project.
﻿
Table B.1 (continued)
52 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
Bibliography
[1] ISO/IEC/TR 9126–2:2003, Software engineering — Product quality — Part 2: External metrics
[2] ISO/IEC/TR 9126–3:2003, Software engineering — Product quality — Part 3: Internal metrics
[3] ISO/IEC/TR 9126–4:2004, Software engineering — Product quality — Part 4: Quality in use metrics
[4] ISO 10007:2003, Quality management systems — Guidelines for configuration management
[5] ISO/IEC/IEEE 12207:2008, Systems and software engineering—Software life cycle processes
[6] ISO/IEC 14102:2008, Information technology — Guideline for the evaluation and selection of CASE
tools
[7] ISO/IEC/TR 14759:1999, Software engineering — Mock up and prototype — A categorization of
software mock up and prototype models and their use
[8] ISO/IEC 14764:2006, Software Engineering — Software Life Cycle Processes — Maintenance
[9] ISO/IEC 15026–3:2011, Systems and software engineering — Systems and software assurance —
Part 3: System integrity levels
[10] ISO/IEC 15504–1:2004, Information technology — Process assessment — Part 1: Concepts and
vocabulary
[11] ISO/IEC 15504–2:2003, Information technology — Process assessment — Part 2: Performing an
assessment
[12] ISO/IEC 15504–3:2004, Information technology — Process assessment — Part 3: Guidance on
performing an assessment
[13] ISO/IEC 15504–4:2004, Information technology — Process assessment — Part 4: Guidance on use
for process improvement and process capability determination
[14] ISO/IEC 15504–5:2012, Information technology — Process assessment — Part 5: An exemplar
software life cycle process assessment model
[15] ISO/IEC 15939:2007, Systems and software engineering — Measurement process
[16] ISO/IEC 16085:2006, Systems and software engineering — Life cycle processes — Risk management
[17] ISO/IEC/IEEE 16326:2009, Systems and software engineering — Life cycle processes — Project
management
[18] ISO/IEC 19761:2011, Software engineering — COSMIC: a functional size measurement method
[19] ISO/IEC 20926:2009, Software and systems engineering — Software measurement — IFPUG
functional size measurement method 2009
[20] ISO/IEC 20968:2002, Software engineering — Mk II Function Point Analysis — Counting Practices
Manual
[21] ISO/IEC/TR 24748–1:2010, Systems and software engineering — Life cycle management — Part 1:
Guide for life cycle management
[22] ISO/IEC/TR 24748–3:2011, Systems and software engineering — Life cycle management — Part 3:
Guide to the application of ISO/IEC 12207 (Software life cycle processes)
[23] ISO/IEC 25001:2007, Software engineering — Software product Quality Requirements and
Evaluation (SQuaRE) — Planning and management
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved 53

﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
[24] ISO/IEC 25010:2011, Systems and software engineering — Systems and software Quality
Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) — System and software quality models
[25] ISO/IEC 25040:2011, Systems and software engineering — Systems and software Quality
Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) — Evaluation process
[26] ISO/IEC 25041:2012, Systems and software engineering — Systems and software Quality
Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) — Evaluation guide for developers, acquirers and
independent evaluators
[27] ISO/IEC 25051:2006, Software engineering — Software product Quality Requirements and
Evaluation (SQuaRE) — Requirements for quality of Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) software
product and instructions for testing
[28] ISO/IEC 26514:2008, Systems and software engineering — Requirements for designers and
developers of user documentation
[29] ISO/IEC 29148:2011, Systems and software engineering — Life cycle processes — Requirements
engineering
﻿
54 © ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved


﻿
ISO/IEC 90003:2014(E)
﻿
© ISO/IEC 2014 – All rights reserved
ICS 35.080;03.120.10
Price based on 54 pages
